Interpretations of Decline of Buddhism

The prevailing picture of the decline of Buddhism in India is summed up by A.L. Basham, whose classic study argues that persecution played only a minor role; rather the major factor was a reformed religion which we can now call ‘Hinduism’, which transformed worship of Shiva and Vishnu (the latter in various avatars which could absorb local deities) into objects of fervent devotion. Backed by the aggressive campaigning and institution-building of Sankara, this revived Hinduism confronted a Buddhism that centered in the monasteries, had become weak, even decadent. Though it had theoretically, and for some time in practice as well, been a separate religion, challenging caste and denying the Vedas, it failed to base itself in the practical aspects of popular life; the life-rituals of even Buddhist families were handled by Brahmans. Thus the Buddha could be re-interpreted as the ninth avatar of Vishnu, while his teachings were ignored. When the Muslim invasions came, the final blow was dealt to this nearly vanished Buddhism, vulnerable because of its lack of support in the life of the people and its centralisation in the monasteries (Basham 1958: 265–66). 

These familiar themes are given a Marxist interpretation by D.D. Kosambi, in an article originally written in 1956, where he argues in terms of the changing connection with the relations of production (i.e., the economic functions of Buddhism and Hinduism): 

The major civilizing function of Buddhism had ended by the seventh century AD. The ahimsa doctrine was universally admitted, if not practised. Vedic sacrifices had been abandoned…the new problem was to induce docility in the village cultivators, without an excessive use of force. This was done by religion, but not by Buddhism. The new class structure in the villages appeared as caste, always scorned by the Buddhists. Primitive tribesmen were enrolled as new castes. Both tribesman and peasant relied heavily on ritual, which the Buddhist monk was forbidden to practice; ritual remained a monopoly of the Brahman. Moreover, the Brahmin at that time was a pioneer who could stimulate production, for he had a good working calendar for predicting the times of ploughing, sowing, harvesting. He knew something of new crops and trade possibilities. He was not a drain upon production as had been his sacrificing ancestors, or the large Buddhist monasteries. A compromise could also be effected by making the Buddha an avatar of Visnu. So, formal Buddhism faded away (Kosambi 1986: 66).

To substantiate his accusation of decadence, he writes, referring to a description by Hsuan Tsang: 

The sangha now depended on the higher classes, without the minimum contact with the common people which was needed even to serve those higher classes well. A tooth-relic of the Buddha was exhibited at the fee of one gold piece. Naturally, prophecies were current of the end of the religion, when such and such an image should have sunk out of sight into the soil. That the religion itself had already sunk virtually out of sight in the mire of wealth and superstition would seem clear to modern eyes not blinded by faith (Kosambi 1975: 315–16).

This is eloquent, but Kosambi, the Marxist son of a famous Buddhist convert (see Chapter 7), is never so sarcastic regarding Brahmanical ritual! 

The theme of Buddhist decadence is a pervasive one, finding support in Marxist analyses of the wealth of the Sangha as essentially non-productive and result of exploitation of the peasants who provided the surpluses which maintained them. A good example is a study by Jacques Gernet on the economic role of Buddhism in Chinese society. The Vinaya texts, he argues, had sophisticated legal concepts regarding property, and because with state support the monasteries were free from taxation and corvee labour, they could attract people away from the tedious life of farming to a supposedly non-productive life. Some monasteries were maintained by the imperial state; others were privately maintained, and some functioned as large estates living off the labour of peasant serfs. Many became business enterprises. Monasteries, in other words, were far from being the centres for collective living and spiritual search that they had been meant to be (Gernet 1995). While there has never been sufficient data to study monasteries so closely in India, the notion of exploitative monasteries is repeated by most Marxists, including Kosambi.

Finally, the idea that it was Muslim invasions, with the sacking of many of the great centers of Buddhism, such as the university monasteries at Nalanda, which dealt the final blow is widely accepted in India today. This ‘sword of Islam’ thesis was accepted even by Ambedkar: 

brahmanism beaten and battered by the Muslim invaders could look to the rulers for support and sustenance and get it. Buddhism beaten and battered by the Muslim invaders had no such hope. It was an uncared for orphan and it withered in the cold blast of the native rulers and was consumed in the fire lit up by the conquerors….This was the greatest disaster that befell the religion of Buddha in India…. The sword of Islam fell heavily upon the priestly class. It perished or it fled outside India. Nobody remained to keep the flame of Buddhism burning (Ambedkar 1987: 232–33).

Some Questions 

There are puzzling aspects, sometimes contradictory, to all these interpretations. If, for instance, Buddhism, through its monasteries and commercial orientation, was encouraging capitalism, why should it be overwhelmed by a Brahmanism that mainly functioned to extend agricultural production? By all accounts, the mode of production fostered by Brahmanism was more backward, more feudal, less commercial and urban-oriented, more ritualised: why in an era of expanding world trade should it have come to dominate in India? Why a historical process that is apparently a step backward to a form of agriculture-centered production? This is, in part, a question about the nature of ‘feudalism’ in India, and also whether the hegemony achieved by Brahmanism in the last half of the first millennium really represented a step backward in socioeconomic terms.

 As to why Brahmanism could triumph, there are further questions. First, did monastery-centered Buddhism by the middle of the millennium represent a ‘decadent’ or ‘exploitative’ social phenomena that gave nothing significant in exchange for the surplus it appropriated? Second, did its lack of ritualism or daily life ceremonies leave openings that Brahmanism could fill? If neither explanation holds, then what others can be given? 

There are inconsistencies in the analysis of the role of the monasteries. If they were really centers of clever commercial organising and banking, then they were not simply parasitic and unproductive. And, if monasteries drew peasants away from their ‘productive’ (i.e., exploited) life in society, that meant they provided an outlet for escape, an alternative power center to state tyranny— this would suggest a reason for the political ruling classes to be hostile to them, but then this doesn’t square with the notion that they simply were an exploitative burden on the peasantry. More nuanced descriptions of Chinese society reveal fluctuations in the role of monasteries: though they had become exploitative at the end of the millennium, they played an important entrepreneurial role earlier, and at many periods they provided crucial support in the forms of grain and other charity to peasants (Wright 1965: 58–59; Lai 1995). Kosambi himself has, as we noted in Chapter 4, described the entrepreneurial role of monasteries in supporting trade and helping to extend agricultural production. Descriptions by Chinese travellers indicate that the monasteries often did provide a life of comfort, and sometimes luxury, that might well have lead to hostility from sections of the masses or non-Buddhist elites—but it is also true that at the same time they provided services, both educational and medical. It is clear that the religious and socioeconomic role of monasteries varied significantly from time to time and at this point no simple generalisations are possible.

 Hsuan Tsang’s account of thousands of monasteries does not add up to a very large proportion of the population; and it is only in the case of Nalanda that he indicates much luxury and service to the monks. This might be compared to the infrastructure surrounding the research of a large university today, but it does not necessarily describe the typical mode of existence in the monasteries. The fact that Brahmanism was more decentralised does not mean the system required less of the surplus, only that the Buddhist monasteries provided a more visible religious establishment. It would indeed be biased to argue that the Buddhist monasteries were any more ‘unproductive’ or parasitical than Brahmanic priests who lived off of the innumerable gifts from believers. In fact, the huge temple complexes and the divinisation of kings that marked the Brahmanic revival between the 7th to 8th centuries required a tremendous requisitioning of surplus. 

To say that Buddhism offered nothing to lay believers in comparison with the innumerable ritual ties binding Brahman priests and non-Brahman householders evades one crucial issue: there was a difference in principle between what Brahmanism and Buddhism taught for lay believers. Buddhism actively contested the highly ritualised life-cycle ceremonies prescribed by Brahmanism, emphasising instead righteous conduct, and seeking actively to displace both the Vedic sacrifice and the newly developing rituals. This does not mean that it offered nothing for the religious and ritual needs of lay followers. There were simple rituals and forms of participation by lay followers in monastic life. Buddhist devotionalism under Mahayana especially served popular emotional needs (this is clear for Chinese society, as Whalen Lai shows). Brahmanism’s ability to coexist with and absorb local cults (where often only the elites interpreted local deities as an avatar of Vishnu or a form of Shiva) is well-attested, but Buddhism did the same in many southeast Asian countries and we have evidence that Buddhism also was appropriating various cults of local gods and goddess through much of the period in India as well. 

Finally, we know rather little about the actual rituals and culture of the masses in this period. Basham’s expressed certainties that Buddhist families used Brahman priests and followed Vedic rituals ignores the fact that this could have been true only of the elite. Among the masses of people, certainly, ritual practices and ceremonies differed from those of traditional Brahmanism, as they do even today.

Historiographical Questions 

One of the most important objections to all the facile generalisations made about the decline of Buddhism in India is the lack of historical evidence. This is a general problem of ancient Indian history. Looked at in comparison with such societies as China, the difference is almost shocking. Except for reports of outsiders (the occasional Greek, or Chinese traveller) and what is indirectly available in literature, there are no social descriptions of the period. Buddhist literature, which gives such descriptions, was wiped out of India: not a single Buddhist text, whether in Pali or Sanskrit, was preserved in India! Today’s references to this literature draw on manuscripts preserved in Sri Lanka, Tibet and China. 

The closest thing to existing Indian ‘histories’ preserved in India are the itihasa-puranas, which were basically lists of kings of dynasties, composed after the 8th century but referring only to kings ruling before the 3rd century CE. They are based in north India and derived from Brahmanic texts (the vamsavalis or ‘genealogies’ and charitas or ‘biographies’) which sought to legitimize the status of kings (Wink 1990: 282–83). Romila Thapar has defended the use of these itihasa-puranas by arguing that the historical tradition of Indian society can be culled from such literature. However, in effect she confirms their biases. Early India had its bards and chroniclers, known as sutas and magadhas, who kept records of events and sang of the glory of kings as happens in every society. However, the bards were treated as low and ‘mixed’ jatis by the Brahmanic dharmasashtras, and since their chronicles and songs were in Prakrit, these were lost, and only after the 4th century CE was some of this material absorbed by the Brahman elite as it was transferred into (rewritten in) Sanskrit for the puranas (Thapar 1979: 238–40). Thus, the itihas tradition that developed not only used an orthodox Brahmanic perspective in treating genealogies; its writers also had a clear interest in covering up the origins of many of the ruling families, which were ‘low’ in varna terms or even ‘barbarian’ according to Brahmanic ideology. Aside from these Brahmanic (and other orthodox social and philosophical) texts and also the material provided from outside, Indian history up until the time of the Turks and Mughals has to be reconstructed largely from evidence of inscriptions, coins, and archaeological excavations. It is a strange situation for a society whose elite prides itself on its literary and intellectual skills. 

A more genuine historical tradition requires both a sense of scepticism and loyalty to empirical reality, and an organisational or institutional independence from the rulers themselves. China had one of the most developed historical traditions; however biased, these recorded the action of rulers and sometimes their subjects during the dynasties themselves. Though ‘history’ was not an early ‘science’ in Buddhism as it was in China, still Buddhism did foster a historical approach: the early Pali texts show an orientation to a fairly sober description of historical events, and the monasteries were institutions of potentially great autonomy. In fact, Sri Lanka, a Buddhist society, did produce two important historical chronicles which add to our knowledge of early India. It is quite striking that only the Buddhist chronicles of Sri Lanka give an account of India’s greatest emperor, Asoka; the Brahmanic sources barely mention his name. The single example of a similar chronicle in India is the Rajatarangini of Kashmir, written in the 12th century under king Jayasimha, which may have been influenced by Buddhism (Thapar 1979: 243–44; Kosambi 1985: 116n). 

Thapar’s defends the use of Brahmanical sources with the argument that ‘every society has a concept of its past and therefore no society can be called ahistorical’ (1979: 238). This does not come to grips with the fact that what is preserved in India has been the Brahmanical ‘concept of its past’ and not that of a nebulous ‘society’. The concept of the past as revealed in Brahmanical sources is quite different from the one revealed in Buddhist sources, not to mention those of other Indian traditions or preliterate indigenous groups within India. Moreover, the very different conceptions of the past embodied in Buddhist literature have been erased in India itself. 

We can well believe that quite a lot of literature, including chronicles, must have been available once. But mostly Buddhist records, whether chronicles, popular works, sacred texts, vernacular versions of the Chinese and Tibetan translations from Sanskrit, that  we now have, must have been kept in the monasteries—and lost when the monasteries were destroyed. Such records must have existed; they formed the basis for the Pali texts, for instance, which were preserved in Sri Lanka, as well as for Tibetan, Chinese and other translations of Buddhist literature. Taranatha, the early 17th century Tibetan chronicler of Buddhist Indian history, refers to manuscripts he relied on that are not known today. The disappearance of Buddhism from India also has meant the disappearance of some of the most valuable Indian historiography, and a deep Brahmanic bias in the existing records.

 It is important to realise that this constitutes a large gap in the overall history of Indian society. This history is not simply, as Kosambi asserts, a record of the successive changes in the means and relations of production (Kosambi 1975: 1); it is, like all history, a record of human actions and human relationships as they change and develop through time. These are related to changing modes of production but cannot be identified with these. These human actions and relationships are precisely what we know little about. To take only one example of how this is relevant and not simply to those concerned about Buddhism as such, we can take the question of gender. One of the results of the domination of Brahmanic literature is the complete ignoring of the role of queens and matrilineal monarchies in many parts of ancient India. For example, the Satavahanas in Maharashtra and Andhra, and their Iksvaku successors in Andhra, were matrilineal. Judging from inscriptional evidence, Satavahana queens like Nayanika and Gotami Bala-siri, and Iksvaku queens such as Camti-siri and Bhati-Deva were powerful and important people, some of whom may even have been the active rulers at times. Mirashi’s presentation of the Satavahana inscriptions in Devanagari transcription (especially Mirashi 1981, II: 5–20) and Dutt’s description of the role of Iksvaku royal women as revealed in Nagarjunakonda ruins (1988: 128–31), as well as Mahayana texts such as the Srimalasimhanada Sutra show this. However, such women are not mentioned at all in the Puranic sources and so have been left out of the normal historians’ accounts of India (e.g. Thapar 1996; Sastri 1999). Mirashi ignores his own evidence to assert it was impossible that women should have had so much power (Mirashi 1981, II: 4–16, 34n, 41–49).

 This situation itself puts a large question mark on all the generalisations we have seen about the decline of Buddhism in India.

The Question of Violence 

What about the role of force and violence in the disappearance of Buddhism from India? The ‘Hindutva’ forces, so powerful in India today, make much of the argument that historically Hinduism has been a tolerant religion, absorbing and co-opting its opponents rather than using force against them, and they, in contrast, depict Islam as a violent, prosyletising religion. This argument fails when we consider the problem of historical evidence. Those who sack monasteries and kill monks or their lay supporters do not leave evidence of their crimes! Consider how much would be known, for example, about the attacks on and murders of Indian Christians and missionaries in Adivasi areas during the period 1999–2000, if it had not been for the world-wide Christian connections and the modern mass media?

That Brahmanism was not tolerant of ‘heretics’(pashandas) is quite clear from the Sanskrit sources themselves. The story of Rama killing Shambuk is symbolic of violence exerted both against ‘low’ castes who overstepped their role and against ‘heretical ascetics’. The Arthashastra is quite specific in classifying the samana sects along with untouchables: ‘Heretics and Candalas shall stay in land allotted to them beyond the cremation ground’ (Arthasastra 1992: 193). More specifically, Kautalya says, in Rangarajan’s translation, ‘Ascetics who live in ashramas and Pashandas [who live in reserved areas] shall do so without annoying each other; they shall put up with minor irritations. Those who are already living in an area shall make room for newcomers; any one who objects to giving room shall be expelled’. The passage makes it clear that pashandas were forced into something like ‘reservations’.

The Arthashastra’s general orientation suggests that Buddhists were looked upon as being equivalent to untouchables; and a Maharashtra historian, B.G. Gokhale, makes a similar point when he notes that Buddhists in the late period in Maharasthra were targets of a resurgent Brahmanism, noting that locally at Ellora and elsewhere some of their units were known as Dhedwada and Maharwada (Gokhale 1976: 118). It is not without reason that 19th and 20th century Dalit leaders such as Ambedkar and Iyothee Thass argued that Dalits were descendents of Buddhists who had been transformed into untouchables by Brahmans.

As Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty’s study of the Gupta period puranas makes clear, Brahmanical attitudes towards pashandas hardened over time. Tolerance in the period of the Upanishads and Asoka turned into a prescription for murder in the puranas. As the Linga Purana describes in its version of history, the Dharma was destroyed because of the Buddha-avatar, a ‘chastiser’ was born called Pramitra who ‘destroyed barbarians by the thousands and killed all the kings who were born of Sudras, and cut down the heretics…. At the age of 32 he set out, and for 20 years he killed all creatures by the hundreds and thousands, until the cruel act reduced the earth to nothing but ashes’ (O’Flaherty 1983: 123). The version she cites from the Matsya Purana is equally stark:

Those who were unrighteous—he killed them all: those in the north and in the central country, and the mountain people, the inhabitants of the east and the west, those in the area of the highlands of the Vindhyas, and those in the Deccan, and the Dravidians and Sinhalas, the Gandharas and Paradas, the Pahlavas and Yavanas and Sakas, Tusakas, Barbaras, Svetas, Halikas, Darada, Khasas, Lampakas, Andhras and the races of the Cola. Turning the wheel of conquest, the powerful one put an end to the Sudras, putting all creatures to flight….

O’Flaherty thus calls the Matsya Purana, Vayu Purana, Brahmananda Purana, Vishnu Purana and Bhagwat Purana ‘the basic scriptures of Gupta paranoia and insecurity’ (ibid.: 124). In fact, Brahmanic paranoia would be more accurate, since as she makes clear, Gupta practice was actually quite tolerant.3

Buddhist sources point more specifically to a great deal of violence in the millennial-long conflict of Buddhism and Brahmanism. Hsuan Tsang, for example, gives many stories of violence, including the well-known story of the Shaivite king Sashanka cutting down the Bodhi tree, breaking memorial stones, and attempting to destroy other images (Beal 1983: II, 91, 118, 121). He also mentions a great monumental cave-temple construction in a mountainous area in Vidarbha, said to have been done by the Satavahana king under the instigation of Nagarjuna, that was totally destroyed (ibid.: 214–17).

The late 16th century and early 17th century Tibetan Buddhist chronicler Taranatha describes many more incidents, referring to the ‘three hostilities’ against Buddhism, three periods when Buddhism was under violent attack. The first was that of Pushyamitra Shunga at the end of the Mauryan period:
The Brahmana king Pusyamitra, along with other tirthikas, started war and they burned down numerous monasteries from Madhyadesa to Jalandhara. They also killed a number of vastly learned monks. But most of them fled to other countries. As a result, within five years the Doctrine was extinct in the north (Taranatha 1990: 121).

The ‘second hostility’ appears to be that of Mihirakula (the fiercely anti-Buddhist king who raided north India in the 6th century), though Taranatha does not use the name and instead says a ‘Persian’ king destroyed Magadha with a Turuska army, ruined many temples and damaged Nalanda. The ‘third hostility’ had appears in the south, with less overt reliance on state power; it describes two Brahman beggars, one of whom gains magical powers to start a fire that consumes 84 temples and huge numbers of valuable documents in the country of Krishnaraja (Taranatha 1990: 138, 141–42). 

When fierce debates with Brahmanic pandits began to take place, these were often marked by violence. In Orissa, writes Taranatha, after one debate the tirthikas became victorious and destroyed many temples of the insiders. They robbed in particular the centers for the Doctrine and took away the deva-dasas [vihara slaves]….[Many debates were lost in the south and] as a result, there were many incidents of the property and followers of the insiders being robbed by the tirthika Brahmans (Taranatha 1990: 226).

Finally, while Turks destroyed Vikramasila and Odantapura in the 12th century, it is noted that this happened because they had mistaken them for forts and in fact the king had stationed soldiers there (Taranatha 1990: 318–19): the Turks made a simple mistake! This destruction is taken as the final blow and marks the end of Taranatha’s chronicle, as monks fled from there to Nepal, to the south-west of India, and to south-east Asia.4

Violence in history is easily forgotten. A major example in India may be the Kalinga war, which is attested to by Asoka’s own inscriptions. Visiting the country of Kalinga in the 7th century, Hsuan Tsang described it as once having a dense population but then being depopulated, but gave as explanation only a story about a fabulous rishi who cursed the people. In the plethora of Buddhist legends about Asoka, which stress his wickedness before the conversion, the devastating results of his own major war were not included.

The ravages of time have also played a role in erasing the Buddhist heritage of India. The glory of Ajanta’s paintings could survive until British times simply because the cave region was so inaccessible, while other monuments were simply buried—until recovery in the 19th and 20th century led to a new process of theft (with important relics ending up in European museums or private collections), destruction due to failures in maintenance including the failure of the Archaeological Survey of India today! (Menon 2001; Kalidas 2001).5

In the end, the patronage of kings was important both for Buddhism and Brahmanism, and the gradual conversion of kings to Brahmanic ideology proved decisive. Rulers gave financial support to Brahmans, took the responsibility of enforcing varna laws and discriminating against ‘heretical’ sects, and refused state protection to their persons and property—if they did not actively murder and loot them themselves.

Buddhists philosophised this decline; the notion of constant change was after all a major theme. The idea that the Dhamma would fade with time can be seen in Taranatha, who notes in regard to Pushyamitra Shunga that ‘as predicted, the first 500 years constituted the period of the flourish of the Law of the Teacher, and the next 500 years the period of its decay’ (Taranatha 1990: 121) and writes that ‘by the influence of time, the Law was also not as bright as before.’ Thus Taranatha’s own interpretation is often one that simply sees a natural process of decay, interpreted with periodic re-establishment of the Dhamma by brilliant Bodhisattvas and teachers. His very way of telling stories of constant destruction and recovery of manuscripts and teachings suggests the fundamental transitoriness taught by Buddhism. At the same time, also shown in the stories is a many-levelled, fierce and often violent conflict at the social level.

The Alliance between Brahmans and Kings 

The strength behind the Brahmanical revival was royal patronage (for an almost identical argument see Weber 1996: 130). Whatever influence the growing Vaishnava or Shaivite cults, (and not all expressions of these were within the framework of Brahmanism) began to exert within ‘society’, state power was crucial. It was ultimately the kings who enforced either the exclusivist Brahmanic varnashrama dharma or the tolerant Buddhist Dhamma. After Ashoka, up to the 7th century or so, most kings patronised both religions— which was encouraged by Buddhism, discouraged by Brahmanism— and we have no very certain historical knowledge about how many very fervent Buddhist kings (or queens) there may have been. Most rulers were probably opportunistic. However, it is a striking fact that most of the new regional dynasties in India that arose after the 7th and 8th centuries—the Karkotas and Pratiharas of the north, the Rashtrakutas of the Deccan, and the Pandyas and Pallavas of the south—were supporters of Brahmanism and established centralised state cults focusing on Hindu image worship. The sole exception was the Pala dynasty in Bengal (about 750 CE—1161 CE). It was this royal patronage that proved decisive in the defeat of Buddhism.

A key aspect of this patronage was the famous land grants, which began to become prominent by the 6th century and then expanded rapidly; these grants were most often made to Brahman settlers. While Kosambi emphasises their economic function and interprets these gifts as resulting from the technological knowledge the Brahmans provided for extending cultivation, the more likely motivation was political. Peasants themselves possessed the technological knowledge for agriculture; what they did not have, and Brahmans did, was access to the sacred texts that legitimized kings and provided a basis of knowledge for education. The shastras allowed the Brahmans who studied them, as Herman Kulke has noted, ‘a command of a considerable body of knowledge on state administration and political economy’ (Kulke 1997: 237).

Brahmans were more of a political specialists than technical specialists. From this group came not only priests, but also councillors, administrators and clerical staff for the kingdoms. They helped the establishment of local administration, not only by running the administration themselves in the villages they received in grants, but also by providing resources to help royal administration in surrounding villages in the same locality. At the higher level they provided legitimacy by creating genealogies and origin mythologies identifying the kings as Kshatriyas and organising impressive ceremonial functions that invested the king with all the paraphernalia and mystique of Hindu royalty; at the lower level they propagandised the mystique of social supremacy and political power. They taught the population, they established ritual and priestly relations with the prominent households of the region, they promulgated caste and the rights of kings. In contrast to the Buddhist monasteries, they provided no social structures and no ideologies that could facilitate revolt.

In contrast to Buddhism and Jainism, Brahmanism offered kings very unencumbered benefits. Brahmanism offered them status and legitimacy without making any moral demands on them. The very extravagance of the depiction of self-sacrificing kings in the traditions of Buddhism and Jainism shamed those who were not inclined to meet this ideal. The Tamil epic Silapaddikaram, for instance, is full of stories of kings who simply died because of their moral transgressions; its central story revolves around the death of the king and queen and the near-destruction of the great city of Madurai, because of kingly injustice. Such stories also gave legitimacy to popular resistance to royal injustice. If we contrast this with Manu’s description of the divinity of kings and his depiction of the danda, the ability to punish, as central to the concept of rulership, the attraction of Brahmanism for kings will be clear. Buddhist kings were expected to behave morally in their own lives and to be just and generous towards their subjects. Kings accepting Brahmanism were only expected to enforce the caste system. This would ensure that their use of power could be confirmed, just as the rich could be confirmed in their accumulation of riches, without any need to limit this by ethical considerations.

At the organisational level, Buddhism tended to draw its monks away from direct social and political involvement, including involvement in the service of kings. While the Sangha in many societies (Thailand, Sri Lanka and even China) did provide ideological and material support to rulers,6 its autonomy and potentiality for providing a base of opposition in comparison to the very diffuseness of Brahmanism marked it as a threat. Thus, ideologically, socially and organisationally Brahmanism in a narrow self-interested sense, proved more useful to Indian kings, than Buddhism. That it militated against a stronger political consolidation at an all-India level, and politically weakened Indian society in crucial ways, is a different matter.
The Role of Islam 

Almost all historians see the invasion of the Turks, signifying the advent of Islam as a ruling power in India, as dealing the final blow to Buddhism in India. The reality, as we have seen, was much more complex. To view ‘Muslims’ uniquely as destroyers and looters of monasteries and temples in contrast to people of other religions (e.g. ‘Hindus’) is an erroneous concept, a product of the Hindutva ideology that began to take shape in 19th century India. Conquerors, of every religion and race, have always tended to loot and destroy; and the symbols of the culture, wealth and power of the conquered have always been a major object of such destruction. Pre-modern rulers, whatever be their religion or race, have normally discriminated to some degree or another against people of other religions and races, often ghettoising them and occasionally, depending on the economic–political situation, used violence against them. Notions of ‘jihad’, the ‘just war’, the subjugation of the mleccha and various other ways of vanquishing ‘evil’ ideology and people from the opponent, groups have pervaded all religions, Buddhism perhaps less than others. Rulers of all religions, similarly, have allowed people of other religions to live within their territories, particularly if these have some social and economic strength. The degree of rights (more accurately, privileges) versus ghettoisation and discrimination has normally depended on nonreligious factors.

Islam in these respects has been little different from other major religions. Had Buddhism been sufficiently strong both economically and socially at the time of conquest, Buddhists would have been treated much as ‘Hindus’ were treated. On the whole, Islam’s record of tolerance in premodern times, in regard to Christian, Jewish and ‘Hindu’ inhabitants of territories ruled by Muslims has been as good as other religions. In this sense, Ambedkar as well as distinguished historians like Basham fell into a Hindutva conceptual trap in blaming Islam.

However, some religious and ideological factors were involved that helped make ‘the sword of Islam’ if not the ‘greatest disaster’, a major blow for Buddhism in India. Buddhism and Islam were competitors at a level very different from the relations between Islam and Brahmanism. Both were universal religions, drawing their adherents from all ethnic groups and all countries. Both were missionary religions, not confining themselves to a geographic territory, sending out their teachers and preachers to win over all men and women to the true doctrine. Both were connected with commerce and trade— the Muslim trading network in fact superseded the Buddhist trading network that linked India with Rome, Persia, Greece and Africa to the west and through central Asia to China in the east. In the west, the confrontation between Islam and Christianity led to bitter wars. Buddhism discouraged militarism more than either Islam or Christianity, yet the confrontation was no less profound, not because of their difference, but because of their similarities.

Brahmanism did not offer the same kind of challenge to Islam. It did not seek converts. Brahmans also were probably not too concerned if significant numbers of low caste or frontier people turned to Islam as long as their heartland areas were not challenged; and they could learn to live with mleccha rulers if these were willing to enforce the varnashrama dharma. Ironically, the alliance of Brahmans with Muslim rulers (and later with British colonial rule) was almost as effective as it was with officially ‘Hindu’ kings.

Wink’s massive study, Al-Hind, notes the long-standing dominance of Buddhism, and suggests that it was only gradually, and with the support of kings, was it superseded by Brahmanism. This in turn was linked with the external dominance of Islam:

As the inscriptional sources throughout India make clear it was the power of the kings which was decisive in the restoration of the new brahmanical order. Brahmanism, culminating in the cults of Shiva and Vishnu under the patronage of regionally entrenched kings, with huge stone temples clustering in newly arising regional capitals which accommodated peripatetic courts, and sendentarization and settlement of nomadic or mobile groups, accompanied by agricultural intensification—this was the ‘vertical’ pattern which, with its more solid forms, descended on the open-ended world of the itinerant trader and the Buddhist monk.

But, he adds, this did not mean that trade disappeared; rather the ‘increasing density of regional economies was a function of India’s increased role in world trade’, a role that now took place under the aegis of the Muslims, the hegemonic commercial civilisation of the age. ‘This entire development is unthinkable without the new cosmopolitan religion of Islam superseding Buddhism at the same time that the ‘brahmanical restoration’ takes place’ (Wink 1990: 230). 

Why did this happen? Wink stresses the connection between the rise and fall of Indian kingdoms and external trade links, especially with the Arab-dominated trade to the west, and with a resurgent China to the east. The ‘medieval’ period in India was one of an intensification of agriculture, however the deepening of regional economies was related to a world trade, dominated by Islam. Brahmanised regional kingdoms could hope to achieve all-India hegemony only through alliances with Muslim and other external powers.

Wink’s historical survey shows some of these processes in his review of the dynasties that dominated India in the last half of the first millennium. The first was the Karkota dynasty in Kashmir, which began early in the 7th century, dominated trade routes to the west and to Rome, and made an alliance with the Chinese who  were concerned about Muslims as well as the challenge from a growing Tibetan power. It was on the basis of this alliance and by using soldiers recruited from central Asia and the Punjab that the Karkota king, Lalitaditya, embarked on a ‘world conquest’, or digvijay, of India between 713 to 747 CE, conquering Kanauj, onetime capital of Harsha, then moving through Orissa to the gulf of Bengal, then to the Deccan and Konkan, returned through Gujarat to Kashmir. This event is seen by many historians as being the turning point from the ‘classical’ to the ‘medieval’ period of India. And with the amassment of huge wealth, Lalitaditya was able to build shrines, monuments and temples, including a huge temple to the sun at Martanda that marked the revival of Brahmanism in Kashmir (ibid.: 237–54). 

Following this the Palas of Bengal came to dominate in the second half of the 8th century. The most powerful ruler was Dharmapala (769–815 CE), who ruled Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Nepal and Assam, and also brought Kanauj under his control. For the first time, the historic lands of Buddhism were conquered from the east. From the west, the Arabs advanced into Sind, while Tibet arose as a new power and the Tang dynasty came to control in China. These factors conditioned predominance of the Palas. In contrast to the other rulers, the Palas all throughout their rule were major supporters of Buddhism, though they also patronized Saivism and Vaisnavism and supported Brahman migration from the Kanauj area. It was under them that the crucial monastic university of Vikramsila attained importance, and it was through Bengal that Buddhism was taken up in Tibet. The full-scale upsurge of Brahmanism came later with the Senas (1097–1223), the migrant warriors from Karnataka in south India who were fierce Shaivites, and sponsored Hindu cults throughout Bengal (ibid.: 259–72; see also Eaton 1997: 9–16).


The next crucial rulers, according to Wink, were the Gurjara Pratiharas, who had emerged in north Gujarat and Rajasthan and were indigenous pastoral and hunting groups as well as some immigrant Hunas. These groups later formed the Rajputs, who went on to become the typical landed gentry and recognised ‘Kshatriyas’ of north India. With them the ancient Brahman–Kshatriya antagonisms, symbolised in the story of Parashuram killing off all the Kshatriyas, were soon replaced by a symbiotic relationship, as the Rajputs became the focus of a new Brahman-controlled mythologising. They became the guardians of Brahmanic orthodoxy, but they were landlocked, with their capital centered at Kanauj and therefore were unable to achieve true hegemony (Wink 1990: 276–92).

The Rashtrakutas who controlled Maharashtra, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh, from the late 8th to the 10th century, were described by the Arabs as the true paramount rulers of India. Their greatest ruler Krishnaraja I (CE 738–773) was the builder of the fabulous rock-cut Kailasha temple, a monument that symbolised a takeover of the cave-temple heritage of the Buddhists and Jains. They gained power due to the favourable position of Gujarat in the maritime trade with the Islamic world, and their rise paralleled the expansion of this trade (ibid.: 303–09). 

Finally, the Cholas of Tamil Nadu became dominant throughout India, in the late 10th and 11th centuries. They based their power on brahman-occupied villages and, again, on huge temple complexes symbolising royal divinity, such as the Rajeshwari temple (ibid.: 231). Bhakti movements, both of Shaivism and Vaishnavism, spread during their time, fighting and replacing to a large degree the ‘heretic’ religions of Buddhism and Jainism. The rise of the Cholas was linked to the economic advance of China in the Sung era and the tremendous expansion of trade it involved. The Cholas also expanded into southeast Asia, where Brahman dominated courts similarly emerged, though there most of the population retained a loyalty to Buddhism. They were an exception to the general exclusion of Indians from active role in seafaring and trade (ibid.: 311–34).
Till here: 
‘Round and round the mandala’ is how John Keay has described the power shifts and rather meaningless conquests of the era (Keay 2000: 167). The common features of these kingdoms were decentralised and ‘feudalised’ administration, shifting hierarchies of all India control, the sponsorship of elaborate and magnificent temple complexes proclaiming the glories of both kings and Brahmans, and access to outside trade as a major source of power and surplus. At the village level, with the spread of agriculture, there was an increasing proliferation of artisan and service jatis (castes), in contrast to the earlier guilds, and whole villages of carpenters, weavers and such like depicted in the Jatakas. Numerous village temples featured local gods and goddesses now identified with Vishnu, Shiva or other ‘Great Tradition’ deities. Their worship and wealth were controlled by priests who were largely Brahmans. The castes of untouchables, as we known them today, began to make their appearance, serving as leather-workers, butchers, and field labourers. The proud status of farmer-householders as gahapatis vanished; now the leading landholders of the village sought to depict themselves as Kshatriyas or else were condemned to the inferior position of Shudras. While trade linkages with the outside world continued, they were now largely (except for eastern India) controlled by merchants of non-Indian communities, Arabs and others. India became ingrown.

Muslim Conversion 

The large majority of Muslims found in the Indian subcontinent by the British were not descendents of immigrants, whether Turks or Mongols or Arabs by origin, but descendents of converted Indians. Why the conversion took place has been a matter of intense interest, to Indians themselves as well as to scholars.

In his recent study of Islam in Bengal, Richard Eaton describes ‘four conventional theories’ which he calls: (1) the ‘Religion of the Sword’ thesis (forcible conversion), (2) the ‘Royal Patronage’ thesis (self-interested conversion for the benefits of being Muslim under a Muslim king); the ‘Religion of Social Liberation’ thesis (Islam being an equalitarian religion attracted low-caste converts fleeing the oppressions of Brahmanic varnasrama society); and (4) the immigrant thesis. The first two he rejects on the grounds that the mass of poorer Muslims are found not at the centers of Muslim rule, where both force and patronage would have been of greater significance, but in the northeast and northwest, at the peripheries. However, he also rejects the Social Liberation thesis, arguing that most of the mass converts had never really been Hindus. They were basically hunting, fishing, gathering peoples who went directly from a tribal culture to that of Islam. Most of these tribes such as the Rajbansi, Pod, Candal, Kuch and other indigenous groups had been only lightly exposed to Brahmanic culture. Eaton argues instead that in Bengal the converts came mainly from the eastern areas which had not been settled into cultivation or ‘Hinduised’. Islam in Bengal was thus identified with the expansion of cultivation (Eaton 1997: 118). And he adds, rather sarcastically, that the Social Liberation thesis attributes resent-day values to peoples of the past’ by presupposing that they had a desire for equality:

Before their contact with Muslims, India’s lower castes are thought to have possessed, almost as though familiar with the writings of JeanJacques Rousseau or Thomas Jefferson, some innate notion of the fundamental equality of all humankind denied them by an oppressive Brahmanic tyranny (ibid.: 117).

Eaton does not give a name to his own thesis, but since he implies that the mass of lower-class Indian Muslims came directly from ‘tribal’ origins, from people outside the reach of the Brahmanic caste system, we could call it the ‘Tribe to Muslim’ thesis.

However, if we look at the situation in Bengal, in particular at the time of the Muslim conquest, this thesis does not seem to hold. In spite of the centuries-long upsurge of Brahmanism in India, it was slow to capture eastern India. In Bengal itself the strongholds of Buddhism were in south and east Bengal, in the kingdoms whose seaports provided links with the flourishing trade with the Buddhist influenced kingdoms of southeast Asia. This area saw less Brahman migration as compared to that in west Bengal. But Brahmanisation cannot be simply identified with agricultural settlement. Eastern and northern Bengal, as reported by Hsuan Tsang, were well-cultimated regions. It seems likely, then, that though Islam did help in the extension of agriculture, it did not initiate it; a large section of the masses must have been cultivators before conversion.

Here the interesting question arises once again: who were the Candalas? Bengal is the only state that had an untouchable caste called Candalas at the time of the British (in fact they organised a strong social movement, calling themselves Namasudras). As Eaton points out, the mass of indigenous people in Bengal were probably ‘Proto-Munda’ speakers, i.e. using an Austro-Asiatic language that as it went towards the east became mixed with Indo-Aryan and Dravidian forms. The word ‘Candal’ was used, as we pointed out, for people not simply in the east but also in the madhyadesha or Gangetic plains as well as central India. It is also strikingly similar to the name of a Mundari-speaking ‘scheduled tribe’ today, the Santhals. It seems a reasonable hypothesis, then, to argue that these proto-Munda speakers spread from Bengal into central India and also into some regions of the Gangetic plains. As the hegemony of Brahmanism was consolidated, those who could be dominated and conquered became known as ‘Candalas’ and were treated as untouchable, in spite of their resistance which those in more hilly and remote areas could remain independent. There may well have been some ‘collective consciousness’, nurtured by teachers and traditions, spreading from the ‘Candalas’ in the more central areas of India to the east. In the east many of these groups must have provided support for Buddhism, where they learned an equalitarian high tradition. Taranatha tells the story of a chieftain of eastern Bengal whose son studying in a Brahman school was 
beaten up by Brahman boys saying ‘You are born in a low family.’ When he asked the reason for this, they said, ‘Being a Buddhist Tantrika your father gave the Sudra queen a higher status and, while worshipping, he does not distinguish between the low and high castes and allows them to mix (Taranatha 1990: 291).

These ‘indigenous’ people, who were by no means simple ‘tribals’, did not need to read Rousseau or Jefferson to learn values of equality; they learned it from Buddhist traditions. Once Buddhism was decisively out of power in India and there was no support for escaping discrimination, it is understandable that they would have turned to a religion that, though drastically different in so many ways, also had egalitarian traditions (however much they were modified by medieval hierarchicalism). Those who became Muslim became known simply as Muslim cultivators (or weavers or whatever); though they were treated in caste-like ways, they were never untouchables. Those of who, for whatever reasons, did not convert, or were powerless to identify themselves with the Muslim community, were categorised as ‘Candals’ or ‘Kaivartas’ (fishermen castes) and the like. In spite of Eaton’s prize-winning scholarship, the Social Liberation thesis stands.

The Nature of Indian Feudalism 

Finally, we return to the important question of whether Brahmanic hegemony meant a step forward or backward in terms of advancing forces of production and human betterment. There is no question that in terms of human values of equality, rationality and non-violence, Buddhism fostered a higher form of society. In the Chapter 4 we argued that, beginning in the first millennium BCE and continuing for centuries after that when India was a major force in global trade and development. It also fostered a dynamic and open commercial society that meant a relative advance in the development of productive forces.

But what was the economic impact of hegemony of Brahmanism? In part, this question has been debated within India in terms of the issue of ‘feudalism’. While Kosambi’s version of feudalism stressed the relations of dependence that came to develop between overlords and subsidiaries, the contributions of a later Marxist historian, R.S. Sharma, have also emphasised relative economic backwardness: demonetisation and some stagnation of production, a turning inward, and an enserfment of most the peasantry (Sharma 1997: 48–85). There has been a vigorous historical debate on this issue, which has provided the context for Andre Wink’s intervention. Wink connects the resurgence of Brahmanic orthodoxy, beginning around the 7th century, with the Muslim impact by relating the varying fates of the new regional kingdoms of India with external alliances and stressing the role of Arab-Muslim control of world trade. However, he goes on to link this with an effort to disprove the ‘feudalisation’ thesis. He argues that demonetisation within India itself did not take place because in many cases Arab coinage replaced it. He stresses the way in which the Arabs in the 9th and 10th centuries saw India as a land of tremendous wealth and who described the Rashtrakuta king as the fourth richest in the world and as ‘king of kings’ in India (Wink 1990: 219–31). This according to him is sufficient to argue against Sharma’s and the feudalism thesis. He argues instead that there was a ‘deepening’ of the regional economies, an extension of agriculture, a continuing expansion of trade even if its coinage was provided by outsiders, and a ‘re-urbanisation’ which was ‘more solid’ than the world ‘of the itinerant trader and Buddhist monk’ (ibid.: 230). The picture is one of Buddhism as supporting a more extended, shallow, less economically developed society, while the Brahmanism/Islam combination was connected with economic advancement.

However, trade in the earlier period was hardly that of ‘itinerant’ traders; it was extensive and organised. The ‘deepening’ of the new regional economies could be called, in other terminology, ‘agricultural involution’ —a weakening of commercial ties, a gradual stagnation in enterprise and innovation. Sharma is right about this aspect of feudalism, though he does not link it with the conflict between Brahmanism and Buddhism. The wealthy subcontinent with its many kingdoms, as reported by the Arabs in the 9th and 10th centuries, had emerged after a long period of economic development influenced by Buddhism—and many of these kingdoms were to fall prey, before long, to new vigorous invaders whose rule was significantly different from that of earlier ‘barbarians’ absorbed into Brahmanic hierarchies. Trade linkages continued, but Indian merchants no longer played a role in them; they were takers of external trade, not its makers. The contrast with the vigorous economic growth and political consolidation of China around the same time is striking; it is from this period that China pulls ahead of India. As Brahmanism succeeded in defeating Buddhism much more thoroughly than Confucianism ever did in China, it did so at the cost of weakening the overall economic and political capacity of Indian society.

The contrast with China can be seen in other ways. We can analyse the fate of Buddhism by comparing its relationship to Confucianism and Taoism, on the one hand, with its relationship to Brahmanism in India, on the other. Buddhism in China had its ups and downs, with periods of heavy repression and of recovery. Both Confucianism, as the ideology/religion of the elite, and Taoism, as a mass-based, mystic materialism similar to Tantra, opposed Buddhism almost as thoroughly as did Brahmanism. In China, as Whalen Lai puts it, ‘the holocaust of 845’ when ‘the Buddhist establishment was destroyed, as the state decimated Sangha membership and confiscated its property’ resulted in the major decline of Buddhism in that country, with ‘no escape to a southern haven, no restoration…no popular support for a revival, and saddest of all, no rebirth of the tradition’ (Lai 1995: 339). This was around the same period as the period of Brahmanical repression and triumph in India.

Similar also was the fact that the triumphant Neo-Confucianism appropriated many specifically Buddhist features (including service to the poor) while Taoism appropriated local gods and cults (Wright 1959: 93–97)—just as Brahmanism appropriated Buddhist features of non-violence and integrated locally popular deities and cults with the overall Sanskritic–Vedantic framework. Similarly, some scholars of China, like Wright, argued that Buddhism was a ‘politically incompetent religion’ (ibid.: 106), just as those of India, like Drekmeier, have argued that in giving a solution to the problem of order and disintegration of tribal communities at a ‘spiritual-psychological level’ Buddhism had encouraged a ‘withdrawal from the political’—in contrast to the ‘code of governance’ presumably given in the dharma of Brahmanic Hinduism (Drekmeier 1962: 294–300).

However, the differences are crucial. Buddhism did survive in China—notably, what we know as the Pure Land and Zen forms of Buddhism flourished after this time. Buddhist records survived, as did groups of people who defined themselves as Buddhists. The notion of a ‘withdrawal from the political’ cannot explain the dramatically different fate of Buddhism in the two societies; it cannot explain the disappearance of Buddhism in India. 

It would appear that Brahmanism and Buddhism were much more in contradiction with each other than Buddhism was with Confucianism and Taoism. The crucial issue was that of social hierarchy, which for Brahmanism included caste and the varnashrama dharma. This could not be reconciled with Buddhism. The family oriented culture of Confucianism also was in conflict with the universalistic ethics of Buddhism, but the differences were not so great, and the rationality of Confucianism proved something of a bridge. Confucianism fostered an elitist society, but one with enough universalistic values to allow mobility for the poor and ‘low’-born, something that was anathema to Brahmanism.

Brahmanism was also able, precisely because of caste, to penetrate to lower levels of village and city society than Confucianism by itself could in China. Despite the penetration the differences and gaps remained, in that the culture and religious expression of the ‘Dalit-Bahujan’ masses was sharply different from that of the more Brahmanised rural and urban elites. But these masses also had their very traditions and cultures interpreted by Brahmanism; they were unable to maintain their own institutions. Almost none could become intellectuals; those who became rulers or politically and economically powerful local groups had to accept Brahmanic intellectual and social hegemony. Brahmans themselves continued to have significant economic and political, as well as cultural–religious power and constituted the single most powerful and wealthy social group, knit together by a sophisticated idelogy and wide institutional networks.

Brahmanism, in contrast to Buddhism and Islam, was inwardlooking. It considered India as its ‘holy’ land but was fearful of expansion, treating outside countries as those of impure barbarians, or mlecchas; rural and agrarian but without giving real status to agrarian producers. Its pre-eminence in India signified a new era of ‘feudalism’ that meant economic backwardness and the dominance of caste in society. While many sections of the masses became Muslim to identify themselves with a new, militant and egalitarian religion, for those who remained within the Brahmanic fold, a revolt against their condemnation to low status could be expressed through bhakti devotionalism. But this, as we shall see, had serious limitations.




